1 Purpose
Passwords are a crucial part of managing access. This password policy is to support Adaptavist's Access control policy, 5-02 Access control policy.  It is the purpose of this policy to ensure that passwords are strong and treated wisely by Adaptavist's employees to enhance security and at the same time following the recommendations described in NIST Special Publication 800-63.

2 Scope
All Adaptavist employees in all locations, accessing all information systems used by Adaptavist and on equipment owned by Adaptavist.

3 Policy
It is Adaptavist's policy to ensure that:

This password policy applies for all operating systems and all system logons.

All passwords used by Adaptavist's employees are strong and meet complexity requirements defined in this policy

Not contain the user's account name or part of it.

Be at least eight (8) characters in length.

Have a minimum mix of uppercase, lowercase and digits.

In Okta, password history is 4 last passwords.

Complexity requirements are enforced when passwords are changed or created.

All default system, user and vendor passwords must be changed immediately following installation or first login.

Passwords expiration is not enforced on workstations and standard Okta users.

If necessary, based on business criteria, departments and teams can implement their own password expiration criterias.

All service accounts are excluded from password expiration but as a precaution they must have the minimum needed privileges assigned to them and must be unable to log on to OS, if possible.

Employees should use different passwords for personal use than for work.

When storing and communicating passwords secure tools and methods must be used.

When communicating secrets like passwords or keys, services like onetimesecret.com can be used, using as short a lifetime of the secret as possible.

When communicating a secret pair like username / password employees should use a different channel/method of communication for each part of the pair.

Use of multi-factor authentication (MFA) is recommended whenever possible and is mandatory for defined sensitive or critical service access or information classified as SECRET.

See 9-04 Defined MFA services 

All symmetric algorithm keys and private keys are like passwords and our password policy guidelines apply to them.

See 9 Access Control .

Screenshot of current password settings in Okta


Expand to see screenshot from password policy in Okta
4 Responsibility
These responsibilities have been defined for this policy:

The Security Forum  reviews and approves this policy and is responsible for supporting, implementing and monitoring compliance.

All employees are required to read, understand and comply with this policy as well as to report non-compliance, internal or external, actual or suspected, deliberate or accidental to the Compliance and Security Manager .

All managers are responsible for ensuring that external contractors and 3rd party vendors with access to Adatavist information systems are introduced to and comply with this policy.


Senior Responsible Owners are responsible for ensuring that the requirements of this policy are implemented within any programme, projects, systems or services for which they are responsible.

5 Nonconformity
Nonconformity to this policy is to be reported to the Compliance and Security Manager , a member of the Security Forum  or to TAG IT Support.


6 Review
The policy will be reviewed annually or more frequently if required to ensure conformity with the organizational goals.


7 Approval
